The Doverning Body and the Writing Committee take the responsibility of translating God's word very seriously.
As we'll see in this report, the Bible translation done by Jehovah's people has played a key role in making Jehovah's word widely available in simple, clear language that touches the hearts of sincere people.
In 2021, we reached an exciting milestone. The New World translation is now available in whole or in part in well over 200 languages.
Let's look at a few key landmarks along the way.
In 1950, my mother and her family were at Yankee Stadium when Brother Nor released the New World Translation. It was something unforgettable for them.
Years later, when I heard the recording of Brother Nor's talk, I understood why.
But now, to the international, the opposite increase the assembly of Jehovah's Witnesses, the No-Wild translation of the Christian speech section.
No wonder he said, it gives me extreme pleasure to release the New World translation.
Brother Nor was overjoyed to release a translation that was not tainted with false religion, that restored Jehovah's holy name to its rightful place, and it was translated by anointed brothers of Christ.
Back then, most English-speaking people used the King James Bible. It used old-fashioned words like thee and thou, that were hard to understand.
The New World translation was so much clearer and it restored Jehovah's name to its rightful place seven thousand times.
The same need existed in other languages too. So what began to produce the New World translation in additional languages?
It was a slow, painstaking process.
Some early editions of the New World translation were taking over 20 years to complete.
But since 1989, the governing body always assigns a team of translators who encourage each other to keep moving through the 66 books and over 31,000 verses.
When a translator learns that he has been assigned to work with a Bible translation team, he is overwhelmed.
One said, I couldn't sleep for many nights, I even had nightmares.
It is a tremendous challenge to fully understand the meaning of every part of the text before he starts translation.
Imagine trying to replicate a food recipe, but you do not have the original ingredients. You need to use substitutes, but still create the same taste and flavor.
Translating the Bible is something like that. You cannot use the original ingredients, the Hebrew and Greek words.
However, using the words in your language, you want to recreate the same meaning and emotional impact as the original verse.
The governing body recognizes what a responsible project this is, so they arrange specialized training to guide translators and to assure them of Jehovah's support.
More than 130,000 questions from Bible translators have been answered in the past 30 years or so.
And these answers are not only provided to the teams that ask the questions, but to all Bible translation teams.
This approach made the translators work much easier, but the focus on Bible translation was about to intensify.
The governing body became aware of some difficult problems that some of our brothers were facing, particularly with certain language groups, you had just one Bible for a family or group or even for a congregation, and they had to share that one Bible.
In addition to that, some languages did have new translations of the Bible, they were available, but they not only took Jehovah's name out, but they replaced it with the name of a local deity.
So back in 2004, the governing body decided to expand Bible translation work so that more and more languages could have the new world translation.
With the governing body's clear direction, Bible translation picked up speed. Then came the landmark 2013 annual meeting.
And we're pleased to announce at this annual meeting that the work on this revision recently was completed.
You don't have to wait at all. Here it is that revised edition of the new world translation.
We think you're going to find that this application is going to be the ideal digital companion to the Bible that you now have in your hand.
The simpler 2013 English text sets a pattern for translators because it places greater emphasis on meaning rather than on words.
Let's look at first Peter 5.2. I'm going to read it from the previous edition of the new world translation, and on the screen you'll see the revised version.
Shepherd, the flock of God in your care, not under compulsion, but willingly.
Did you notice anything different? Serving as Overseers has been added.
We never had those words in the new world translation before because the word translated serving as Overseers didn't appear in the Greek text that was used as a basis for it.
However, since then, an older copy of First Peter was uncovered, and it does contain the word.
It appears that the word was removed from some later manuscripts of the 4th century.
Why would anyone remove the word? Scholars have suggested a possibility.
In verse 1, Peter addresses the elders. And then in verse 2, he calls them Overseers.
That proves that the same person can be both an elder and an Overseer. The Catholic Church disagrees.
In the Catholic Church, an elder is equated with a priest and an Overseer is much more important.
He's equated with a bishop and to them a priest, a lonely priest, can't also be a bishop.
So when the Catholic copyists came to verses 1 and 2, they must have thought that the church couldn't be wrong, so the Bible must be wrong.
And they took it out.
Did Jehovah's people hear if there's a difference between what we believe and what the Bible says, we will change.
We leave the Bible alone.
When I think back to the very evening when I realized that I have been given the truth, I recall thinking to myself,
Jehovah's witnesses have the truth, and so they must have the very best Bible translation.
And so that was the first thing I asked for. I wanted my own copy of the New World Translation.
And so now, when I have the privilege to release a new language edition of the New World Translation,
and I see the joy on the faces of the friends, I can connect directly to that because that's exactly how I felt.
I just love releasing the New World Translation in another language.
Sometimes it's very exciting because the brothers don't think they're able to even receive the printed copy in time for the release.
In a couple of cases, they received the shipment of the Bible just the day before the release talk.
See, you can imagine, the brothers were totally excited, and then when they received it, that excitement was really enhanced.
The day I had the privilege to release the evade New World Translation in Ghana, we traveled to the assembly hall for the program.
As we neared the assembly hall, here there were many people with little stands alongside the road trying to sell things to the brothers.
Many were selling Bibles because our brothers did not have the New World Translation.
It made me so happy to think that this was the last day our brothers would be forced to buy an inferior quality Bible translation.
Now, they would have the New World Translation.
Every copy of the New World Translation that is printed or downloaded has the potential to change someone's life.
Out preaching and teaching work is more important than ever.
Jehovah provides the tools we need.
As we use them, we make Bible truths widely available in hundreds of languages.
We help people to understand the truth and let it reach their hearts.
Thus, in a mighty way, the word of Jehovah keeps growing and prevailing.